##Release Process
###Arduino LuniLib, FirmataWithDeviceFeature, and Javascript LuniJS module

####Starting state:  
A branch (bx.y.z) in one of the three finson development repos that is feature complete for the next version target x.y.z.  The branch has been tested to acceptance levels.

####Ending state:
 The master branch of the associated finson-release repo has all the features from bX.Y.Z merged into it and has been smoke-tested.  An annotated tag vX.Y.Z has been created marking the release and making it visible to the Arduino library manager and NPM, respectively.

###Development Cycle

Develop a new release using a dedicated branch, eg, b3.2, in one of the repos in the finson account.  Develop and maintain detailed branch tests to demonstrate that the new branch works correctly.

When the code in the branch is ready for release, merge the development branch into the master branch.  

Create a new branch for point releases from the now updated master branch, eg, b3.2-patch.  

Also create a new branch for the next feature release from the master branch, eg b3.3.

Protect the older development branch.  It should not be updated again, since patches will go into the patch branch (and then be merged into the next development branch) and all feature development will happen in the new development branch.

Run smoke tests to verify that the library survived the branch merge.  Run more detailed tests focused on the new branch functions.

At this point, the master branch of the development repo is ready to release to the outside world.

