
----------
March 2016 V 0.8  Doug Johnson (finson@whidbey.com) 

----------

## DeviceFeature and Device Drivers - Appendix B: Device Registers and Parameter Block Layout

The document device-driver.md describes the overall device feature proposal and most parts of the detailed design.  

Appendix A lists the standard virtual registers that all devices can implement.

This Appendix B lists the registers that are actually implemented by several existing device drivers.  In some cases the detailed format of the parameter block bodies they expect is given.  The `CDR` namespace is defined for the Common Device Registers in the DeviceDriver.h include file.  The `REG` namespace is defined for the device-specific registers in the `DD<device>.h` include file and the contents can be different for each DeviceDriver.

Appendix C defines the detailed message formats used to communicate between the client and Firmata and back again.

---
##*Hello (DDHello)*

The Hello device driver is a simple example of a device driver.  It generates phrases like "Hello, World", using the strings stored as the interjection (eg, "Hello") and the object (eg "world").  

If the millisecond interval is k\>0, the driver generates a `read(CDR::STREAM)` response every k milliseconds.  

###Implemented Registers

Common

    CDR::DriverVersion (r)
    CDR::UnitNamePrefix (r)
    CDR::Stream (r)
    CDR::Intervals (r/w)

Device-specific (Namespace `DDHello::REG`)

    REG::INTERJECTION (r/w)
    REG::OBJECT (r/w)

---
####`CDR::Intervals`
#####Get/set interval timers

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  microsecond interval (LSB)
     1  microsecond interval
     2  microsecond interval
     3  microsecond interval (MSB)
     4  millisecond interval (LSB)
     5  millisecond interval
     6  millisecond interval
     7  millisecond interval (MSB)

---
##*MCP9808 Temperature Sensor (DDMCP9808)*

Note that the values in the parameter blocks for this device are arranged as Little Endian sequences in order to be consistent with the rest of this Device Driver API.  At the lowest level, most of the registers on this device are 16-bit (2-byte) stored in Big Endian order, but the device driver takes care of swapping from host order to device order and vice versa.

If the millisecond interval is k\>0, the driver generates a `read(CDR::STREAM)` response every k milliseconds.  

###Implemented Registers

Common

    CDR::DriverVersion (r)
    CDR::UnitNamePrefix (r)
    CDR::Stream (r)
    CDR::Intervals (r/w)

Device-specific (Namespace `DDMCP9808::REG`)

    REG::AMBIENT_TEMP (r)
    REG::MANUF_ID (r)
    REG::DEVICE_ID (r)
    REG::CONFIG (r/w)
    REG::UPPER_TEMP (r/w)
    REG::LOWER_TEMP (r/w)
    REG::CRIT_TEMP (r/w)
    REG::RESOLUTION (r/w)

### Parameter Block Details

---
####`REG::UPPER_TEMP`
#####Get/set upper temperature limit register.
####`REG::LOWER_TEMP`
#####Get/set lower temperature limit register.
####`REG::CRIT_TEMP`
#####Get/set critical temperature limit register.

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  temperature 째C (LSB)
     1  temperature 째C (MSB)

---
####`CDR::Stream`
#####Get ambient temperature in degrees C.

####`REG::AMBIENT_TEMP`
#####Get ambient temperature in degrees C.

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  temperature 째C (LSB)
     1  temperature 째C (MSB)

---
####`REG::MANUF_ID`
#####Get Manufacturer ID

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  0x00 (manufacturer ID - LSB)
     1  0x54 (manufacturer ID - MSB)

---
####`REG::DEVICE_ID`
#####Get Device ID

*Parameter block buffer* 

     0  0x04 (device ID - LSB)
     1  0x00 (device ID - MSB)

---
####`REG::RESOLUTION`

#####Get/set sensor resolution

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  0,1,2, or 3 (resolution control bits)

---
##*Meta (DDMeta)*

This DDMeta class is an administrative and development tool.  As a device
driver, it provides an API for access to the DeviceTable (how many devices, device driver versions, etc) and code analysis capabilities (memory usage, timing, etc).


###Implemented Registers

Common

    CDR::DriverVersion (r)
    CDR::UnitNamePrefix (r)
    CDR::Intervals (r/w)

Device-specific

    REG::AVG_INTERVALS (r)
    REG::DRIVER_COUNT (r)
    REG::DRIVER_VERSION_LIST (r)
    REG::UNIT_NAME_PREFIX_LIST (r)

---

##*Servomotor (DDServo)*

Control the movements of one or more standard servomotors.

---
###`CDR::DriverVersion`

###`CDR::Intervals`

See Appendix A for information about the operation of the common device registers.

---
###`REG::PIN`
####Get or set the pin number controlling this servomotor.

*Method signatures*

`int read(int handle, (int)DDServo::REG::PIN, 2, byte *buf);`
`int write(int handle, (int)DDServo::REG::PIN, 2, byte *buf);`

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  pin number (LSB)
     1  pin number (MSB)


---
###`REG::RANGE_MICROSECONDS`
####Get or set the range in microseconds to use in scaling 0..180 degrees to pulse widths.

The underlying library default min is 544, max is 2400.

*Method signature*

`int write(int handle, (int)DDServo::REG::RANGE_MICROSECONDS, 4, byte *buf);`

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  Min pulse length (microseconds, LSB) (=> 0 degrees)
     1  Min pulse length (microseconds, MSB)
     0  Max pulse length (microseconds, LSB) (=> 180 degrees)
     1  Max pulse length (microseconds, MSB)

---
###`REG::POSITION_DEGREES`
####Get or set the current position of the servomotor using angle in degrees.

###`REG::POSITION_MICROSECONDS`
####Get or set the current position of the servomotor using pulse width in microseconds.



*Method signature*

`int read(int handle, (int)DDServo::REG::POSITION_DEGREES, 2, byte *buf);`
`int write(int handle, (int)DDServo::REG::POSITION_DEGREES, 2, byte *buf);`

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  angle in degrees (LSB)
     1  angle in degrees (MSB)

---
##*Stepper Motor (DDStepper)*

###`CDR::Configure`
####Set stepper motor interface configuration

Configure the stepper motor attached to the given handle and its associated software object.

###`CDR::Configure`
####Get stepper motor interface configuration

Get the configuration of the stepper motor attached to the given handle and its associated software object.

*Method signatures*

`int status(int handle, CDR::Configure, int count, byte *buf)`
`int control(int handle, CDR::Configure, int count, byte *buf)`

*Parameter block buffer*

####2-wire interface (EasyDriver: step and direction)

     0  interface type (0)
     1  steps per revolution (LSB)
     2  steps per revolution (MSB)
     3  direction pin (LSB)
     4  direction pin (MSB)
     5  step pin (LSB)
     6  step pin (MSB)

####2-wire interface (unipolar motor)

     0  interface type (1)
     1  steps per revolution (LSB)
     2  steps per revolution (MSB)
     3  pin1 (LSB)
     4  pin1 (MSB)
     5  pin2 (LSB)
     6  pin2 (MSB)

####4-wire (bipolar motor)

     0  interface type (2)
     1  steps per revolution (LSB)
     2  steps per revolution (MSB)
     3  pin1 (LSB)
     4  pin1 (MSB)
     5  pin2 (LSB)
     6  pin2 (MSB)
     7  pin3 (LSB)
     8  pin3 (MSB)
     9  pin4 (LSB)
    10  pin4 (MSB)

---
###`REG::MoveR`
####Move to new relative position

*Method signature*

`int control(int handle, Stepper::MoveR, 5, byte *buf);`

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  delta position (steps) (LSB)
     1  delta position (steps)
     2  delta position (steps)
     3  delta position (steps) (MSB)
     4  block? (0 or 1)

---
###`REG::PositionEvent`
####Stopped at most recently commanded position? (synchronous or asynchronous)

*Method signature*

`int status(int handle, Stepper::PositionEvent, 5, byte *buf);`

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  At position? 0 -> no (running), 1 -> yes (stopped)
     1  Position provided?  0 -> no, 1 -> yes
     2  (opt) absolute position (steps) (LSB)
     3  (opt) absolute position (steps)
     4  (opt) absolute position (steps)
     5  (opt) absolute position (steps) (MSB)

---
###`REG::RPMSpeeds`
####Set stepping speed using 16-bit Revolutions Per Minute values

###`REG::RPMSpeeds`
####Get stepping speed using 16-bit Revolutions Per Minute values

*Method signature*

`int control(int handle, Stepper::RPMSpeeds, 8, byte *buf);`
`int status(int handle, Stepper::RPMSpeeds, 8, byte *buf);`

*Parameter block buffer*

     0  target speed RPM (LSB)
     1  target speed RPM (MSB)
     2  max speed RPM (LSB)
     3  max speed RPM (MSB)
     4  accel (LSB)
     5  accel (MSB)
     6  decel (LSB)
     7  decel (MSB)


---

##[Proposed Driver]
##*Signal I/O (DDSignal)*  

Basic digital and analog signal input and output.

`CDR::DriverVersion`

`CDR::Intervals`

See Appendix A for information about the operation of the common device registers.


- modes are j5 modes - INPUT: 0, OUTPUT: 1, ANALOG (or ADC): 2, PWM: 3, SERVO: 4 
- actions are digital read, digital write, analog read (ANALOG or ADC, PWM), analog  write (DAC, PWM)

- define pin group (r or w) all group pins are same direction (read or write) but not necessarily the same type of pin, each pin group has an access handle that can actually do the work (possibly using a port expander)
- delete pin group
- read group, write group (once, intervals) 
- read group and average each channel
- set analog input reference
- set analog input or output resolution

Debugger
<a href="#debugger_debugger">Debugger</a>